
[Prev](intro.md) | [Next](ch2-emotions-constructed.md)

## Ch 1


In this chapter we learn about a bunch of attempts to make the classical view of emotion
happen. Spoiler alert, it doesn't happen. 

The author starts by trying to reproduce an experiment, something about depression vs
anxiety, something that was supposed to be easy. What she encountered was either a bunch
of people who weren't in touch with their emotions, or perhaps lizard people, who as we
know, aren't actually people, because they are lizards. Anyway, many of the participants
were unable to distinguish between various emotions - often grouping distinct
experiences of a given "category" under an umbrella. For example, confusing "sad" and
"afraid", or similarly for pleasant emotions like "calm" and "proud". 

I'm not sure what the underlying reason for this was, but my understanding of the
author's interpretation is "the participants are wrong, and we should teach them how to
not be wrong". To do this, you would ostensibly need an objective measurement of
emotions, to compare with. Based on many classical emotion studies, the face should be a
good indicator of this. So, we measure facial movements, right?

Some background: originally people did studies where actors posed for given emotions,
and they showed these pictures to people all over the world, where everyone guessed them
right. So they concluded that emotion recognition is universal, case closed. But someone
else was like "wait, maybe we should measure some sort of.. measurement". This was
called a facial EMG, and involved attaching electrodes to faces of participants and
making them feel things, to see what happens to their faces. Apparently this could at
most distinguish pleasant from unpleasant, but falls quite short of being a *fingerprint*.

Things get interesting when context is added to an emotion recognition test. Suppose you
have a picture of someone who is mad about something, and use the magic of computers to
photoshop that face onto someone holding a dirty diaper, which would originally be
representative of "disgust". And since you have this carefully crafted photo, you might
as well ask someone what emotion is being conveyed. The result: 9/10 ~~dentists~~
participants identify it as disgust (note: this statistic is made up for dramatic
effect).

In general, there are multiple ways to respond to things in life that might go by the
same name but are not quite the same. You get scared at a movie and react by closing
your eyes, but if you see a tiger on the street you probably won't close your eyes
except maybe to blink.¹

Next step: measure the body. You can do this by having people make a face that should
correspond to an emotion and measuring skin conductance (sweat) and arm tension. You
read that right, the theory was that making a face will induce that emotion, and
trigger a physical response. This actually *kinda* worked, but not quite. There was not
enough resolution to distinguish between similar enough emotions, and the feedback
mechanism was probably due to people actually identify the emotions based on the face
and thus thinking about something that would cause them to feel something. Making a face
without any context or expectation doesn't do the same thing.

It is known that studies ended up finding essentially different fingerprints for what
should have been the same emotion. There is too much variation in the way one can
express something, apparently. This called for a meta analysis of these studies, and
it/they were so meta that it/they found little to no consistency across the individual
studies.² 

Easily the best part of the chapter is when the author presents these findings, and some
people are like "u wot mate?". And they express this anger in so many ways: yelling, calm
threats, silent indignation, literally shaking their head, etc. Their reactions to a
statement that emotions are variable having such variation should really be a Seinfeld
episode.

I'm tired now, so will finish this chapter later. 

TODO
* degeneracy - many to one. multiple brain patterns, same emotion.
* one to many - one neuron can be involved in emotional and non emotional states
* the amygdala is also involved in learning. e.g. novel faces in experiments.


--------------------

¹ Unless you are a tiger enthusiast, or perhaps even a king, and
 feel like seeing a tiger is a normal and safe situation.

² Typical of scientists to all disagree with each other.
