
[Prev](ch1-fingerprints.md) | [Next](ch2-emotions-constructed.md)

## Ch2

This chapter is all about how things are constructed, where things are mainly emotions,
but it goes a bit broader than that. To see that we all live in a matrix of our own
making, we start off with an experiment which involves looking a t splotchy picture and
not being able to identify what the object is in the original image. Once we learn what
it is (no spoilers here), it's impossible to un-see it, and we conclude that the brain,
upon looking at this image from now on, is constructing the visual stimuli corresponding
to the concept we have of the object. E.g., a coffee cup is a concept that can have many
visual representations, but our brain recognizes it by category.

I'm not even gonna try to infer how this simulation concept relates to our understanding
of thinking, feeling, perception, dreaming, but there are clearly a lot of ways in which
brains can fill in the blanks, so to speak. And the _way_ it does that is surely also a
result of both the initial state (genes, morphology, etc), and the experience we've had
that has literally built the intricate microstructures that differentiate our
experiences over time. Actually, now that I say that, I'm wondering if there is a drift,
or if due to social construction we remain relatively "close", in terms of a distance
metric that measures how different our perceptions are in "identical" contexts.

As mentioned above, there is a quick overview in this chapter of the notions of social
construction - how the current social structures influence emotional learning and
reactions, psychological construction - similar, but how we do this on our own (not
quite sure of this one), as well as how the brain does have common large scale (macro)
structure across humans, but the micro structure is built by experience, including all
the above factors.

This is way too complicated to think about. Consider how the way we even think about
this is a result of the things being thought of. Woah, so meta. But actually, it is
though.

Here's an analogy from the author that I really liked. When you bake bread (as everyone
does, since 2020), there are always flour, salt, yeast, and water. But once you have a
loaf, it cannot be decomposed physically or logically into the ingredients. The
properties of the bread emerge from a complicated process involving the inputs. And the
same is true for emotions, and probably other experiences.

Two examples that illustrate the gap between inputs and experiences/emotions.

First is from the author, where she went on a date, felt her face flush, stomach
flutter, and difficulty concentrating, and concluded that this was attraction, or rather
_experienced_ this as attraction. It turned out she had the flu, but that does make the
experience any less real. And it shows that the perceptions that act as inputs to an
emotional experience are contextual - I'm pretty sure she wouldn't have felt this as
attraction in other situations.

The second is my attempt to invoke the pidgeonhole principle - that if you have `n`
pidgoens and `k` holes, where `k < n`, there is at least one hold with multiple
pidgeons. When the author describes degeneracy (same emotion could come from multiple
causes), and one to many (one neuron is involved in multiple emotions), I can't help
thinking how to involve pidgeons. I suppose the conclusion is that both of these must be
true. E.g. if we had degeneracy but not many to one, we would have orders of magnitude
more neurons than we actually do, since each "experience" would have to have its own
dedicated set of neurons. On the other hand, if we had many to one but not degeneracy, I
suppose that would be the classical theory of emotion, with precise neural fingerprints
for each experience.

The author describes terminology that could make discourse about emotion more precise.
Such as removing the word "emotion" ideally, but we will settle for some less ambitious
changes, such as not saying an emotion is "triggered", having emotional "reactions",
swapping facial experssion for facial configuration, etc. These reflect a loss of
certainty we would otherwise imply by using the old terms.

There is one point I want to add my opinion about. She says we should also avoid
speaking of the accuraccy with which we perceive someone else's emotions. I believe this
refers to trying to use facial cues, body language, vocal changes, etc, to infer
someone's experience. As in the previous paragraph, we know these experssions are not
sufficient to understand internal state. Where I would like to "well actually" this, is
that we _can_ actually talk to someone, and cooperate to get closer to a shared
understanding of each person's experience. This will never be perfect, but I think it
makes sense to speak of accuracy in this sense - just because we can't measure it
doesn't mean the theoretical value doesn't exist.ยน


-----------


ยน Note I mean this in the sense that we don't know how or it would be practically
impossible, not that the measurement is theoretically impossible, like we see in quantum
systems. Whether this is true is a good question - whether it's possible to measure
accuracy depends on the assumption that experience is purely an emergent physical
phenomenon (not some sort of new substance), and that the observer's brain structure has
the expressive capability to simulate the other person's. I imagine if brains are turing
complete, this shouldn't be an issue, but someone with a significantly different
microstructure might have a harder time bridging the gap.

Another note about this note. This reminds me of the discussion in GEB about sub-brains.
And how when we spend time with someone, grow close to them, love them, we develop a
sub-brain which is essentially a simulation of that person, possibly able to guess how
they might respond to different things.

